##Paper review: [Mapping Whole-Transcriptome Splicing in Mouse Hematopoietic Stem Cells](http://www.cell.com/stem-cell-reports/abstract/S2213-6711(16)30278-8)
####Stem Cell Reports, Jan 2017

**Goals and findings**: Although many datasets of high-throughput transcriptome for hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) have been published, the alternative splicing (AS) events of transcripts were poorly resolved. This study looked at meta-datasets from microarray and RNA-seq performed on mouse HSCs to assess the overall levels of AS as well as the potential functional influence of AS on specific HSC regulators. They found that AS was common to genes in all functional categories, with genes involved in transcription inclined to have more isoforms. Using RNA-seq data, they generated sashimi plots to quantify different isoforms for HSC-specific genes. The ectopical expression of different isoforms of Pbx1 and Hlf induced distinct functions in HSC. Finally, they generated a comprehensive splicing map in the UCSC genome browser to facilitate visualization.  

**Data**: The datasets used in this study were all from published resources. They extract microarray data from the [ImmGen consortium](https://www.immgen.org) which were performed on Affymetrix ST 1.0 arrays. There were 2 or 3 replicates for each population.  
RNA-seq data on mouse HSCs were jointed from 4 independent studies all conducted on Illumina HiSeq 2000. This study analyzed the raw data using TopHat for read alignment, Cufflinks for read assembly. However, data from the 4 sources differ in numbers of replicates, mouse age, sorting schemes and sequencing depth. 

**Experiments and analytical work**:  

1. They first assessed the comparability between RNA-seq and microarray data using correlation assay. Two types of data of HSC expression were ploted in log2, and good agreement was observed with the coefficient r = 0.742 ± 0.019. However, the significance test for r was missing.  

2. They analyzed AS using microarray data by counting the exon/gene ratio for each exon. They compared the ratio of each exon in HSCs with 248 other immune cell types to identify differential splicing in HSCs. They use FDR to adjust for multiple testing. Exons with adjusted p-value<0.01 and fold-change>1.2 were considered. However, candidate genes predicted to have exon-skipping isoforms were not supported by their q-PCR results.  

3. To test whether microarray data were at least informative for cell type-specific splicing factor expression, they extracted the expression of a list of splicing-associated genes in all 249 populations presented by heatmap. The scale of the heatmap was relative expression ranging from the min to the max values for each single gene. They mainly identified Msi2 which showed a preferential expression in HSCs compared to other cell types.

4. Then they resort to RNA-seq data for AS analysis. The data from all four sources were combined together.  They used information of reads spanning exon junctions to infer various isoforms. The proportions of genes with one or multiple isoforms in the whole transcriptome were calculated. Then they compared such isoform distribution in different gene groups with the whole transcriptome using Chi-squared test to see whether genes associated with particular functions tended to have more AS events. The deviation of AS events from the average was significant for categories including transcription and mitochondrion, with a p-val <0.001 by Chi-squared test, while multiple testing adjustment was not applied here (>40 comparisons). 

5. They focused on specific genes critical for the transcription program of HSCs by generating a series of sashimi plot, in which the raw reads were visualized by bar height and splice junctions were shown by the connecting arcs with read counts for each junction. They identified variant isoforms by comparing to the canonical isoforms defined by the UCSC known gene annotations. Using the sashimi plots, they found minor non-canonical isoforms of HoxA9 and Meis1, and a highly expressed variant isoform of Prdm16. More than two isoforms were identified for some factors although the accurate attribution to transcripts were not certain. The expression ratios of the isoforms were checked by q-PCR which were in agreement with prediction by read counts. However, instead of presenting the results from 4 independent q-PCR experiments, they only showed one representative experiment with technical replicates.

6. They tested the influences of variant splicing on the function of proteins by looking at the truncated isoforms of Pbx1 and Hlf. Variant isoforms were cloned directly from primary HSCs and transduced into HSCs through lentiviral infection.
Functional examination found that Pbx1 isoforms present similar phenotypes while Hlf isoforms have a different function. However, only one experiment of flow analysis was shown and no statistical analyses were performed on these function assays.

7. Finally, they generated tracks of exon expression with mapped junctions on the UCSC genome browser to facilitate visualization of specific alternative splicing events in mouse HSCs.

**Comments and critiques**: This study proposed an extended level of complexity in HSC transcriptome. The methods for isoform identification using microarray and RNA-seq data were not novel though, which were indicated by [Ergun A et al](http://www.pnas.org/content/110/35/14324.full#ack-1) in 2013. In contrast to this previous study, they indicated microarray data were generally not able to capture AS events in closely related populations. They innovated sashimi plots for isoform quantitation from sequencing data which was validated by q-PCR. However, this method still could not attribute the identified junctions to specific transcripts with certainty in the presence of multiple junctions. In addition to the defects of statistical analyses shown above, the study is suspected of “cherry-picking” for alternative splicing genes without providing a whole picture of all transcription-related genes. Overall, this study provided a good way to exploit the splicing information from the increasing number of RNA-seq datasets generated from primary cells.
